
2002/01/06

The New Aspell is complete enough to function as a replasment for
Pspell however not complete enough to use as a stand alone spell
checker.

The following packages need to be installed to use this package:
  perl (I use v5.6.0 but other versions may work)
  libtool (CVS version, HEAD branch)
  autoconf 2.50 or better
  automake 1.5 (earlier versions *might* work)

Before the build:

  ./autogen
  ./config-opt # or ./config-debug

Use ./config-* instead of configure as the ./config-* will add the
necessary options so that things build right with this limited version
of the New Aspell.  Any parameters specified will be passed to
configure.  It will by default be installed in <build dir>/inst.  You
can change that by using the --prefix option.  Becuase some of the
files in New Aspell are incompatible with the released version of
aspell and pspell I do not recommend you install it in /usr/local.  Use
something like /opt/aspell.

Than to build and install:

  make
  make install

You will then need to install a dictionary package for the new aspell.
You can find them at http://aspell.net.  If aspell is installed
somewhere other than /usr/local you will probaly need to add
<prefix>/bin to your PATH or make symbolic links to the executable in
order for the dictionary to build correctly.

To test things out use either aspell0 or speller-util. aspell0 is a
slightly modified version of the example program distributed with the
released version of Pspell.  Speller-util is a skimmed down version of
Aspell which can be used for creating or dumping dictionaries.

To run the debugger on these programs if there are not installed use
  libtool gdb <debugger parms>
or
  libtool --mode execute <your debugger> <debugger parms>
For example to debug speller-util with ddd use
  libtool --mode execute ddd modules/speller/default/speller-util

Using libtool is necessary to make sure the shared libraries get loaded
right. If you debug them after they are installed this will not be
necessary.

The name of everthing has changed due to the renaming of Pspell to
Aspell however you should also be able to build applications that
require pspell with the new aspell as a backwards compatibility header
file is provided.  No documentation currently exists for the new
interface so for now refer to the Pspell docs keeping in mind the
following changes in the name of things:

  pspell -> aspell
  manager -> speller
  emulation -> enumeration
  master_word_list -> main_word_list

You can also see aspell0.c in the example directory for example of
using the new interface.

Using static libraries will NOT work due to the mixing of C and C++.

Autogen should be run when ever anything but the source files or
Makefile.am files are modified by either yourself or a cvs update.
